Title: Remote sensing data imputation using deep learning for multispectral imagery

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.24003v1

Published Time: Tue, 26 May 2026 00:13:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# Remote sensing data imputation using deep learning for multispectral imagery 

Shuang Liu a,b , Fiona Johnson a,b , Rohitash Chandra b,c 

> aWater Research Centre, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, 2052, Australia
> bARC ITTC Data Analytics for Resources and Environments, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, 2052, Australia
> cTransitional Artificial Intelligence Research Group, School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, 2052, Australia

Abstract 

Remote sensing techniques have been increasingly utilised in aquatic applications in recent years. A common challenge in using optical satellite data is the presence of missing observations due to cloud cover. These data gaps can lead to missed detection of critical events, such as algal blooms, in lakes of high interest to water authorities. As a result, enhancing the completeness of optical satellite datasets is crucial for improving the monitoring and prediction of algal blooms. In this study, we compared a traditional data imputation method (i.e., linear interpolation) with deep learning models for reconstructing missing spectral bands across four lakes with historical records of algal blooms. The deep learning models adopted include CNN-based architectures (i.e., CNN, Inception Resnet, and Autoencoder) and CNN-LSTM-based architectures (i.e., CNN-LSTM, Resnet-LSTM, and Autoencoder-LSTM). Our results demonstrated that deep learning models substantially outperformed the baseline linear interpolation method in imputing spectral band values within artificially masked regions. Among these models, CNN delivered the best performance across most lakes. Furthermore, we evaluated the performance of algal bloom indices (i.e., Green /Red and NDCI) derived from the imputed imagery by comparing them with the observed data. Our results demonstrate that deep learning models are e ff ective for imputing missing data in PlanetScope SuperDove imagery, enabling more reliable applications in water monitoring. 

Keywords: 

Deep learning models, Convolutional Neural Networks, Autoencoder, Inception Resnet, CNN-LSTM, LSTM, remote sensing 

1. Introduction 

Remote sensing has become an increasingly valuable tool for aquatic monitoring in recent decades [1, 2, 3, 4] support-ing assessments of water quantity and quality in estuaries [5], large lakes [6], and coastal waters [7]. Satellite-based observa-tions provide broad spatial coverage and relatively high tempo-ral resolution, making them especially useful in regions where field data is sparse or unavailable [8]. The emergence of Cube-Sat satellites [9] such as those operated by Planet, has further enhanced monitoring capabilities by providing improved spa-tial, temporal and spectral resolution. These advancements of-fer new opportunities for lake management, including tracking changes in water quality and quantity [10, 11]. As a result, there is a growing demand for satellite-based spatiotemporal monitoring to support informed decision-making in lake and catchment management. Despite the growing utility of satellite observations, their ef-fectiveness is often limited by factors that compromise data quality and lead to gaps in data coverage [12]. These include technical issues, such as instrument malfunctions (e.g., scan line corrector failure in Landsat 7, and missed detection in GRACE due to battery issues) [13, 14], adverse weather con-ditions (i.e., cloud cover) [8], and satellite orbit constraints that result in missing swaths [15]. In optical satellite, the missing values caused by natural events such as cloud cover can hinder monitoring, prediction and decision-making. This is especially critical in aquatic applications, where data gaps obscure key ar-eas of lakes undergoing algal blooms. Given the high spatial variability of blooms [8], even partial cloud cover can prevent accurate detection and assessment, underscoring the need for eff ective data imputation. PlanetScope 1 (launched in 2018) has been utilised in vari-ous earth observation applications, such as land-cover mapping [16], crop yield estimation [17], and monitoring water quantity and quality [18, 19]. The latest addition to PlanetScope, the SuperDove (PSB.SD), has been in operation since 2020 [20]. PSB.SD imagery o ff ers high spatial resolution (3 meters), fre-quent temporal coverage (sub-daily – daily) and expanded spec-tral bands (8 bands), including visible, and near-infrared wave-lengths, along with additional bands (i.e., yellow and Green 1). Its spectral calibration has been refined to closely match Sentinel 2 [21], facilitating the transferability of algorithms and methods originally developed for Sentinel 2 to PBS.SD. How-ever, the presence of cloud-masked missing pixels remains a major challenge, limiting the e ff ectiveness of PlanetScope Su-perDove. To maximise the utility of optical satellite imagery and improve model performance, pixel-level data imputation is essential, particularly for capturing dynamic changes in lake systems a ff ected by deteriorating water quality, such as turbid-ity and algal blooms. The application of advanced deep learning for imputing missing values in the emerging PBS.SD imagery remains lim- 

> 1https://earth.esa.int/eogateway/missions/planetscope
> Preprint submitted to . May 26, 2026
> arXiv:2605.24003v1 [cs.CV] 19 May 2026

ited in the literature. Di ff erent approaches have been proposed for gap-filling in spatiotemporal datasets, encompassing statis-tical methods and deep learning methods [22]. Statistical meth-ods include discrete cosine transforms [23], singular spectrum analysis [14], spatiotemporal interpolation [24], and algorith-mic methods (e.g., quantile regression in local neighbourhoods) [25]. Deep learning methods have gained significant traction in remote sensing, with the increasing availability of hyperspec-tral and multispectral satellite imagery [26, 27, 28]. Deep learn-ing models such as convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been widely employed for satellite imagery analysis tasks, in-cluding object detection and segmentation [29, 30], and spa-tiotemporal modelling [31, 32, 33]. CNNs have been e ff ective at processing multi-dimensional images and extracting features with minimal preprocessing, making them superior in image prediction [34]. Deep learning models, such as Autoencoders and U-Net, have been promising in restoring corrupted portions of satellite images [35, 12, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40]. Autoencoder-based models learn a representation of the data from the in-put layer and try to reproduce it at the output layer, and there-fore learn from incomplete data and generate new plausible values for imputation. Inception-Resnet combines the multi-scale feature extraction of the Inception architecture with the effi cient training by Resnet’s residual learning [41]. Further-more, hybrid models, such as CNN – Long Short-Term Mem-ory Network (CNN-LSTM) recurrent neural network architec-tures, have been successfully applied to fill the cloud-induced gaps in satellite data [12, 42]. The strength of CNN-LSTM models lies in their ability to capture both spatial and temporal features by integrating CNNs for spatial feature extraction and LSTMs for sequential data modelling. Gap-filling and image reconstruction have been extensively applied to multispectral images from MODIS (Moderate Reso-lution Imaging Spectroradiometer) [43, 44, 45], Landsat [46, 47], and Sentinel-2 [35] satellite data. However, studies on multispectral gap filling for PlanetScope SuperDove are limited [45]. Data imputation is further complicated by the inherent complexity of remote sensing data formats, which often include multiple spectral bands (e.g., multi-spectral and hyper-spectral data). Eff ective data imputation methods need to account for both spatial dependencies and spectral variability to accurately reconstruct missing data, generating plausible representations of the same object across di ff erent spectral dimensions. In this study, we present a machine learning data imputation framework that involves e ffi cient and high-performance deep learning models to impute missing regions in remote sensing data. Our objective is to evaluate the model performance of data imputation for PlanetScope SuperDove imagery a ff ected by cloud masks across di ff erent lake types. To achieve this, we first developed and examined selected deep learning models for data imputation of PlanetScope SuperDove imagery with artifi-cial cloud masks across all eight spectral bands for lakes. We evaluated prominent deep learning models, including CNN, hy-brid LSTM-CNN, ResNet, and hybrid Autoencoder-LSTM, in our machine learning framework. Subsequently, we applied the imputed PlanetScope SuperDove imagery to derive water qual-ity indices by comparing a baseline model with the deep learn-ing models across four Australian lakes with diverse character-istics in size and water quality conditions: Lake Burragorang, Lake Hume, Lake Grahamstown and Lake Carramar. 

2. Data and Methodology 

2.1. Data 2.1.1. Site description 

Four lakes, ranging from 7274 m 2 to 200 km 2 were selected to assess the e ff ectiveness of deep learning models for data im-putation across di ff erent lake types. These lakes di ff er in the frequency of harmful algal bloom occurrences [48, 8, 49, 50]. Lake Hume (Figure 1a) is a major reservoir on the Murray River, located in the Murray-Darling Basin, Australia. As the major operational storage for the Murray River, it supplies wa-ter for irrigation, domestic, stock and urban demands to Victoria and New South Wales. Covering an area of 200 km 2, the lake has a maximum water depth of 40 metres. This lake has been frequently reported to experience algal blooms [48]. Lake Grahamstown (Figure 1b) is a mesotrophic freshwa-ter lake that has experienced periodic cyanobacterial blooms [51, 52]. It is the largest drinking water storage in the lower Hunter River valley [53]. The lake receives an average annual rainfall of 1125 mm and is relatively shallow, averaging 9 me-tres, with a surface area of 28 km 2. The dam is also supplied by diversions from the nearby Williams River, which has highly variable water quality. Lake Carramar (Figure 1c) is a small artificial lake, located in Melbourne. Surrounded by a residential area, Lake Carra-mar is interlinked with two non-tidal lakes, forming the Quiet Lakes system. Lake Carramar is a key part of the local drainage system, receiving stormwater that drains into the nearby Patter-son River. Lake Carramar covers an area of 7274 m 2, with an average depth of 3m. Lake Carramar serves as a stormwater and recreational lake and frequently experiences turbidity and harmful algal bloom events. Lake Burragorong (Figure 1d) is a reservoir situated in the lower Blue Mountains of New South Wales, Australia. Cover-ing an area of 75 km 2, it is the largest water supply for Greater Sydney, providing nearly 80% of the water supply of the re-gion’s water [54]. The maximum depth of the lake is 105m. 

2.1.2. Remote sensing data 

PlanetScope SuperDove (PSB.SD) is a new generation Cube-Sat satellite constellation with very high spatial (˜ 3m) and fre-quent temporal coverage (daily or sub-daily) [20], providing new opportunities for monitoring water quality in lakes and reservoirs. Available since June 2020, PSB.SD features eight spectral bands, including the distinctive Green 1 and Yellow bands, compared with other satellites (i.e., Sentinel 2). Plan-etscope SuperDove imagery was acquired through Planet’s API and downloaded as orthorectified, harmonised surface re-flectance images in GeoTIFF format. 2Figure 1: Location of a) Lake Hume, b) Lake Grahamstown, c) Lake Carramar, and d) Lake Burragorang, Australia Table 1: Details of lake size, average depth, function and harmful algal bloom occurrence in four lakes and period (days) considered. 

Lake size Average depth Function Harmful Algal bloom Period (days) Lake Carramar 7274 m 2 3 m Stormwater Frequent Sep 2020-Dec 2024 (215) Lake Grahamstown 28 km 2 9 m Dam Less frequent Sep 2020-Dec 2024 (335) Lake Burragorang 75 km 2 9 m Dam Less frequent Aug 2020 - Dec 2024 (240) Lake Hume 200 km 2 27 m Recreational Frequent Aug 2020 - Dec 2024 (225) 

> Table 2: Summary of satellite products used for analysis.

Planetscope SuperDove (PBS.SD) Resolution (m) 3Revisit time Sub-daily to daily Data availability August 2020 - present Spectral bands Central wavelength (nm) Blue 490 (50) Green I 531 (36) Green 565 (36) Yellow 610 (20) Red 665 (31) Red Edge 705 (15) NIR 865 (40) 

32.2. Methods 2.3. Deep learning models 

We employed two primary variants of deep learning mod-els, including 1) CNN-based models and 2) CNN-LSTM-based models. In particular, our models include CNN, Incep-tion ResNet CNN, Autoencoder CNN, CNN-LSTM, Inception ResNet LSTM, and Autoencoder LSTM (Figure 2). Addition-ally, we applied a simple linear interpolation method as a base-line for comparison. 

2.3.1. CNN-based models 

CNNs consist of multiple convolutional and pooling layers designed to e ffi ciently extract spatial features [55] and learn pat-terns through parameterised convolutional filters. CNNs have been prominent for processing image and video data and re-mote sensing applications [56, 57]. In this study, we design a CNN for spatial feature extraction from PSB.SD imagery, with a custom loss function that selectively calculates MSE (Mean Squared Error) for artificially masked pixel values (see Equa-tion 1). The CNN model architecture features multiple convo-lutional and pooling layers designed for e ff ective spatial feature extraction across multiple spectral bands, with further details shown in Table 3. An autoencoder is a neural network with a symmetrical struc-ture consisting of encoding and decoding layers [58], where the number of input and output variables is equal. It is designed to learn an e ffi cient data representation (encoding) for dimension-ality reduction. In this study, we developed an autoencoder-based CNN (Autoencoder-CNN) for PSB.SD imputation. The model architecture includes three main components: an encoder, a bottleneck layer and a decoder. The encoder pro-cessed both the input X and the artificial mask, using convolu-tional layers followed by max-pooling layers. The number of filters in the convolutional layers increases progressively with depth, starting with an initial filter count and doubling at each additional layer. The bottleneck layer comprises a convolu-tional layer with a higher filter count, capturing the essential features of X, and creating a compressed representation. The decoder mirrors the encoder structure. Each decoder layer uses upsampling to scale feature maps back to the original size. The Inception ResNet model architecture [41], originally pre-trained on large datasets, is designed to capture robust hier-archical features, making it suitable for satellite image recon-struction. ResNet applied a residual learning strategy to in-crease the depth of its network. The Inception Resnet showed powerful performance in satellite image classification [59, 60]. We employed Inception ResNet to create a computationally ef-ficient CNN capable of processing the full spectral-spatial input from this 8-band PSB.SD imagery. The model di ff ers from con-ventional RGB images by modifying the model’s input layer to handle 8-band data. We used the base Inception-Resnet model without pre-trained weights. On top of the base, we included global average pooling, followed by dropout for regularisation and a dense layer. We used a masked MSE loss function to calculate the MSE loss in the masked pixels. 

2.3.2. LSTM-based models 

CNN-LSTM [61, 62] is a hybrid neural network that com-bines convolutional neural network (CNN) layers with long short-term memory (LSTM) layers in a unified framework. This model has been prominent in time series prediction tasks and has also been applied to remote sensing data processing [63, 64]. The paired CNN with LSTM was applied to leverage both spatial and temporal information inherent in remote sens-ing imagery. Planetscope SuperDove captures repeated obser-vations of the same location over time, forming a timeseries of images. These temporal sequences are particularly valuable for monitoring dynamic water quality events, such as algal blooms, which can evolve rapidly over days. The model was designed to impute missing pixel values across eight bands over time, using a masked MSE loss function that specifically targets the masked (missing) pixels during training. The CNN-LSTM is well-suited for this task, as CNN layers extract spatial features from each image (e.g., water quality status, algal bloom shape, and spectral patterns), while LSTM layers model the temporal dependencies across multiple observation dates. Specifically, we used sequences of five consecutive images (timesteps) to train the model. Each timestep was processed independently by convolutional layers with ReLU activation and defined kernel units (see Table 3). After pooling and flattening, the spatial fea-tures were passed to the LSTM layer, which captured temporal patterns across the five-image sequence. The model was trained using a masked mean square error (MSE) loss function, which focuses learning on the missing pixels only. The configuration of CNN-LSTM adopted here is detailed in Table 3. We also implemented an Autoencoder-LSTM [65] model, which combines spatial feature extraction and temporal sequence learning within an encoder-decoder framework. Autoencoder-LSTM models have been successfully applied in remote sensing applications [66]. In our approach, the encoder consists of 2D convolutional blocks applied to each timestep us-ing a time-split structure. This ensures that spatial features are extracted from each image in the sequence without temporal interference. Each convolutional layer was followed by a max-pooling layer to reduce the spatial dimensions and highlight key features. The temporal modelling is handled by an LSTM layer, which acts as the bottleneck of the autoencoder. After flatten-ing the spatial features from each timestep, the LSTM captures temporal dependencies across the sequence of five images. To reduce overfitting, a dropout layer was applied after the LSTM. The decoder mirrored the encoder structure, using upsampling layers to restore the spatial dimensions of the input. As the de-coder progresses, the number of filters is gradually decreased to match the original input dimensions. A final output layer was applied to reconstruct the imputed image for each timestep, completing the data imputation process. Inception-ResNet-LSTM combines the strengths of ad-vanced spatial and temporal extraction, making it well-suited for remote sensing applications involving time series data. Specifically, the model integrates convolutional layers from the Inception ResNet architecture, known for capturing multi-scale spatial features e ffi ciently, with an LSTM layer that models 4temporal dependencies across sequential images. The Incep-tion Resnet component is wrapped in a time-distributed struc-ture. allowing it to process each image in the time series while maintaining temporal alignment. This is followed by pooling and flattening layers that prepare the extracted spatial features for temporal modelling. The LSTM layer then processed these spatial features across timesteps, learning patterns and changes over time, such as the development of algal blooms. The re-mote sensing imagery contains complex spatial patterns (e.g., water quality status, algal bloom shapes) and temporal dynam-ics (e.g., bloom formation, decay and movement). By com-bining Inception-ResNet’s spatial sensitivity with LSTM’s tem-poral modelling, the model can e ff ectively reconstruct missing data and preserve both spatial detail and temporal continuity. 

2.4. Baseline model 

We implemented a simple linear interpolation method as the simple baseline model to compare against other machine learn-ing methods. For each date, across the latitude and longitude for eight channels were calculated and used to fill the missing values in each individual band. 

2.5. Framework for data imputation 

We begin with an overview of our approach for data impu-tation (Figure 2), followed by detailed explanations for each component in the subsequent sections. The approach consists of five stages: 1) data acquisition of PSB.SD imagery, 2) data processing of PSB.SD data by manually applying data masks to represent clouds and preparing training and test datasets, 3) developing deep learning models and a baseline model for data imputation within the artificial masks, 4) model evaluation of the imputed imagery, and 5) water quality applications of the imputed imagery. In Stage 1, we acquired eight-band SD surface reflectance data and their QA (Quality Assessment) from the PlanetScope platform. The QA data were used to identify and filter out miss-ing pixels, creating the target dataset Y. We processed the raw SD imagery by applying the Usable Data Mask (UDM) to gen-erate an optimal dataset before training the model for data im-putation. The UDM file contains information on weather condi-tions, including clear, snow, shadow, light haze and cloud [20]. We filter the imagery using the clear masks from UDM files to remove pixels a ff ected by cloud interference. We selected the images with fewer clouds in the dataset, and the number of images for each individual lake is shown in Table 2. In Stage 2, we generated artificial masks on the selected im-agery because the model performance can only be evaluated at the pixels with available data. Y represents the target dataset, which may already contain missing values. Mx is an artificial binary mask, where 1s denote available pixels and 0s indicate missing values. The methods described in [38] were taken to generate additional gaps in X. The locations and shapes of arti-ficial masks varied from each imagery. 1. Simulate a two-dimensional Gaussian random field using a covariance function cov(s, s’) depending on the spatiotem-poral distance between pairs of observations at locations s, s’ ∈ [0, 1]. 2. Create a binary mask Mx by applying a threshold θ on the simulated fields. 3. Mask corresponding pixels from Y to create X by calcu-lating the combined mask X = Y × Mx.The exponential covariance function cov( s, s′) =

σ2 exp − || s−s′|| 

> d

 were used, where variance σ2 = 0.95 and spatial range d =0.4 for step 1. A ratio of 10% of pixels was selected for masking in Mx. The generated X and Mx are the inputs to our model, and Y is the target data used for training and testing. For Stage 3, six deep learning models were developed for data imputation of SD imagery on four lakes and examined their performance with the baseline model (linear interpola-tion). The six deep learning models include CNN, Inception Resnet, Autoencoder, CNN-LSTM, Inception Resnet-LSTM, Autoencoder – LSTM and Resnet - LSTM. The dataset was split into 55% training, 25% validation and 20% testing. A cus-tom loss function, masked mean squared error (masked MSE), was implemented, calculating the MSE only for artificially masked values (Equation (1)). The masked MSE was moni-tored in training to assess the model performance. 

• Let Ytrue ∈ RH×W×C : the observed data. 

• Ypred ∈ RH×W×C : the predicted data. 

• V M pred ∈ { 0, 1}H×W×C : the predicted data. 

• 1¬NaN (Ypred   

> i,j,c)

: an indicator function that is 1 where Ypred is not NaN. Then the masked MSE loss is defined as: 

Lmasked MSE =

Pi, j,c VM i, j,c · 1¬NaN( Ypred    

> i,j,c)

· (Ytrue   

> i,j,c

− Ypred   

> i,j,c

)2

Pi, j,c VM i, j,c · 1¬NaN( Ypred   

> i,j,c)

(1) where: 

• i, j are pixel indices (height and width). 

• c is the channel index (i.e., spectral bands). 

• V M i,j,c =1, if pixel (i,j,c) is masked (i.e., needs to be im-puted), and 0 otherwise. We used Keras (TensorFlow)[67] for implementing the deep learning models and open-source vision and image processing libraries in Python. We used a Linux computer powered by an NVIDIA A100 GPU. Each deep learning model was trained for a maximum of 50 epochs with early stopping using the Adam optimiser [68] (learning rate of 0.001), with the custom loss function, masked MSE (Equation (1)). We ran 30 independent model training experiments with di ff erent weight initialisations that ensure the robustness of the selected architecture and help quantify the variance due to di ff erent initial conditions. The deep learning models with the optimal hyperparameter config-uration were trained to reconstruct Y using X and the corre-sponding mask VM x. Once trained, the models were then ap-plied to predict the missing values in the gaps ˆ Y. Meanwhile, a 5Figure 2: Overview of the data imputation and its application in five stages, including data acquisition (8-band imagery and QA data), data processing (artificial mask generation), modelling of deep learning models (i.e., CNN, Autoencoder, Inception Resnet, CNN-LSTM, Autoencoder LSTM, Resnet LSTM) and baseline model (linear interpolation), model evaluation and applications. 

simple linear interpolation was implemented to generate the im-puted imagery as the baseline to compare against deep learning methods. In Stage 4, prediction errors were compared in terms of Pear-son’s correlation coe ffi cient (R), and root mean square error (RMSE) for model evaluation of the observed and imputed val-ues in the masked pixels across eight bands (Equation (2)). The smaller the RMSE values, the better the prediction accuracy: RMSE =

vt 1

n

> n

X

> i=1

(yi − ˆyi)2 (2) where, n is the number of images, y and ˆ y are the observed and predicted values, respectively. In Stage 5, we derived water quality indices from the imputed imagery within the lakes and compared them with the observed indices. The imputed imagery can be used for aquatic appli-cations, for example, water quality index imputation. Several empirical indices [69, 70, 71] have been developed for satel-lite remote sensing to indicate algal bloom intensity. Algal bloom indices, such as the green /red and the normalised dif-ference chlorophyll index (NDCI) [70] ( Red −RedEdge Red +RedEdge ), are com-monly used for algal bloom detection in lakes. For each lake, the imputed imagery from various models was extracted based on the lake polygons. The indices were applied at each pixel within the lake polygon on each day. We then compared the derived indices from the given deep learning models with the observed indices to evaluate the spatial agreement of algal lev-els in the masked pixels. We spatially averaged the extracted indices to generate the daily time series for each algorithm to evaluate the temporal dynamics. 

3. Results 

3.1. Model performance 

Six deep learning models (CNN, Inception ResNet, Autoen-coder, CNN-LSTM, Inception-ResNet-LSTM, Autoencoder-LSTM) were evaluated for eight-band PSB.SD data imputation across four lakes in Southeastern Australia. We evaluated the temporal changes in the respective lakes over selected periods, as shown in Table 1. We applied artificial masks generated from a Gaussian ran-dom field with a 10% pixels mask rate to simulate cloud-masked missing pixels. The optimal configurations for each deep learning model are summarised in Table 3. The model performance was assessed across 30 independent experiments, with results reported in Table S1. Metrics include the mean RMSE and standard deviation across all eight spectral bands for training and testing datasets, evaluated separately for each lake. Figure 3 illustrates the model performance of the six deep learning models across four lakes for eight spectral bands. In Lake Carramar, for example, the CNN model achieved aver-age RMSE values ranging from 0.11 to 0.21 across the eight bands (Figure 3a, Table S2). The Autoencoder model showed comparable performance, with RMSE values ranging from 0.11 to 0.23. The Autoencoder-LSTM model ranked third, with slightly higher RMSE values ranging from 0.14 to 0.25. In con-trast, the Inception-ResNet-CNN and Inception-ResNet-LSTM models performed less e ff ectively, with higher RMSE values across most bands. Notably, the Inception-ResNet-CNN model also showed greater variability in RMSE, indicating less stable performance compared to the other models. In Lake Grahamstown, the CNN outperformed all others, achieving RMSE values between 0.012 and 0.026 (Figure 3b, 6Table 3: Optimal hyperparameter configurations for all six deep learning models used in this study.                                    

> Model Filters Kernel Pooling LSTM units Dropout
> CNN 32, 64, 128 3×32×2–0.2 Autoencoder-CNN 32, 64, 128 3×32×2–0.2 Inception-ResNet-CNN Base model 3×3Global avg. –0.3 CNN-LSTM 32, 64 3×32×264 0.2 Autoencoder-LSTM 32, 64 3×32×264 0.3 Inception-ResNet-LSTM Base model 3×3Global avg. 64 0.3

Table S1). The Autoencoder and Autoencoder-LSTM also per-formed well across spectral bands 1-7, though their RMSE val-ues were higher than those of CNN in band 8. In Lake Hume, CNN and Autoencoder-LSTM showed strong performance, with RMSE values ranging from 0.016 to 0.54 and 0.017 to 0.061, respectively (Figure 3d, Table S2). For Lake Burrago-rang, the Inception-ResNet-CNN and Inception-ResNet-LSTM achieved the lowest RMSE among six models; however, their performance in bands 7 and 8 (Red edge and NIR) was lower than that of CNN (Figure 3c, Table S1), indicating limitations in handling higher-wavelength bands. Overall, CNN with opti-mal configurations delivered the lowest average RMSE across all eight bands in Lake Carramar, Lake Grahamstown and Lake Hume, outperforming the other five models. Autoencoder-LSTM ranked second in overall performance. Notably, RMSE tended to increase with band wavelength, with band 8 (NIR) consistently showing the highest RMSE. This trend reflects the higher variability and intensity of reflectance values in longer-wavelength bands, which pose challenges for accurate recon-struction. Figure 4 presents scatter plots comparing predicted and ob-served values for artificially masked pixels across eight bands. The CNN model demonstrated strong performance, with high Pearson correlation (R) and low RMSE values. For example, in Lake Carramar, R values ranged from 0.81 to 0.93, spanning from coastal blue (band 1) to NIR (band 8). RMSE values re-mained below 0.015 for coastal blue through red edge bands, with a slightly higher RMSE of 0.021 for NIR. These results confirmed the CNN model’s e ff ectiveness in accurately recon-structing missing data. Additional scatter plots for Lake Gra-hamstown, Lake Burragorang and Lake Hume are provided in the Supplementary material Figure S2-4, further illustrating the consistency of CNN performance across di ff erent lakes. In the earlier evaluation (Table S1), CNN, Autoencoder-CNN and Autoencoder-CNN-LSTM emerged as the top three per-forming models. To visualize the reconstructed data, we pre-sented observed and imputed imagery for Lake Carramar (Fig-ure 5) over three distinct dates, each representing di ff erent water quality conditions: low algal blooms (2020-09-05, Figure 5 a-e), high algal blooms (2021-12-23, Figure 5 f-j), and clear water conditions (2024-03-06, Figure 5 k-o). Artificial masks were applied to simulate cloud cover, mainly a ff ecting water pix-els and occasionally extending to the lake’s edges. The shape and location of these masks varied across dates to reflect re-alistic cloud patterns. All three models produced imputed im-agery that closely matched the observed data within the masked regions (Figure 5), demonstrating strong spatial consistency. Specifically, the CNN model achieved R between 0.91 and 0.96, and RMSE between 0.007 and 0.015 within the masked pixels (Figure 5 c, k, s). The Autoencoder-CNN (Figure 5 d, l, t) and Autoencoder-LSTM (Figure 5 e, m, u) also showed high perfor-mance, with similarly strong agreement between imputed and observed values. Figure 6 illustrates the improvement in imputation across eight spectral bands within masked regions by comparing the baseline linear interpolation model with the top-performing deep learning models for Lake Grahamstown, Lake Burrago-rang and Lake Hume, over the period from August 2020 to December 2024. For Lake Grahamstown and Hume, CNN and Autoencoder-LSTM were identified as the best perform-ing models, while for Lake Burragorang, Inception-ResNet and Inception Resnet-LSTM showed better results. Across all three lakes, the deep learning models consistently achieved higher median R (R ¿ 0.8) compared to linear interpolation, which also showed greater variability in R values (Figure 6 a). For Lake Grahamstown and Hume, CNN and Autoencoder-LSTM (median RMSE below 0.02) outperformed linear interpolation (Figure 6 b). In Lake Burragorang, the Inception-ResNet model (median RMSE: 0.027) outperformed the linear interpolation (median RMSE: 0.038) and the Inception-ResNet-LSTM (me-dian RMSE: 0.048). These results highlight the robustness and adaptability of deep learning models for reconstructing missing data across diverse lake types. To visualise the imputed pixels, one representative date was selected for each lake. The deep learning models consistently outperformed the baseline linear interpolation method, show-ing superior spatial agreement and improved performance met-rics across all eight spectral bands within the masked areas. For Lake Grahamstown, linear interpolation yielded a corre-lation of 0.85 with an RMSE of 0.031 (Figure 7c, f). In con-trast, CNN and Autoencoder-LSTM achieved R above 0.93 and RMSE below 0.02 (Figure 7d-e, g-h), indicating more accurate imputation. Similarly, in Lake Hume, the deep learning mod-els achieved correlations above 0.96 and an RMSE of 0.023 (Figure 7t-u, w-x), compared to linear interpolation (R˜ 0.84, RMSE˜ 0.045) (Figure 7s, v). In Lake Burragorang, the top-performing models, Inception-ResNet and Inception-ResNet– LSTM, also provided better imputation results than linear inter-polation (Figure 7k-p). However, the Inception-ResNet–LSTM tended to overestimate the band values (Figure 7p), indicating limitations in its temporal modelling for this lake. 7Figure 3: Model performance (RMSE) of 8 bands using CNN, Autoencoder-CNN, Inception-ResNet-CNN, CNN-LSTM, Autoencoder-LSTM and Inception-ResNet-LSTM for (a) Lake Carramar, (b) Lake Grahamstown, (c) Lake Burragorang and (d) Lake Hume. 

Figure 4: Comparison of CNN predicted or imputed band and observed band in the artificial masked pixels for (a) coastal blue (band 1), (b) blue (band 2), (c) green 1 (band 3), (d) green (band 4), (e) yellow (band 5), (f) red (band 6), (g) red edge (band 7) and (g) NIR (band 8) of Lake Carramar. 

8Figure 5: RGB for (a) observed, (b) additional cloud mask (in white), and (c-e) top three best models (CNN, Autoencoder-CNN, Autoencoder-CNN-LSTM) imputed imagery of Lake Carramar imagery on 5th September 2020. Comparison of the observed and imputed values of 8 bands in the masked pixels for (f) CNN, (g) Autoencoder-CNN, and (h) Autoencoder-LSTM, with R and RMSE shown in each plot. (i-p) and (q-x) is the same as (a-h) but for 23rd December 2021 and 16th March 2024. Note that the location, size and shape of the artificial clouds varied for individual days. 

9Figure 6: The comparison of (a) R and (b) RMSE of the observed against the imputed values of 8 bands for linear interpolation (in blue) and the top two deep learning models for Lake Grahamstown, Burragorang and Hume across 4 years. Note that the top two deep learning models for Lake Grahamstown and Hume are CNN (in orange) and Autoencoder-LSTM (in green), while the top two models for Burragorang are Inception-ResNet (in red) and Inception-ResNet-LSTM (in purple). 

3.2. Application of imputed imagery - water quality indices as a case study 

The imputed imagery enables further exploration of both ter-restrial (e.g., vegetation and land cover) and aquatic monitoring (e.g., water extent and water quality). In this study, we focus on water quality assessment using indices derived from the im-puted PSB.SD imagery. The indices, such as the Green /Red ra-tio and the Normalised Di ff erence Chlorophyll-a Index (NDCI) [70], are commonly calculated from specific spectral bands and serve as indicators for algal concentrations in lakes. Lake Car-ramar and Lake Hume have experienced frequent algal blooms in recent years, making them suitable for evaluating the e ff ec-tiveness of imputed imagery in algal bloom monitoring. To vi-sualise the spatial distribution of water quality indices within the masked lake pixels, we compared observed data, linear in-terpolation results and CNN imputation for both the Green /Red and NDCI. The results for Lake Carramar and Hume are pre-sented in Figures 8 and 9, respectively, using two representative dates for each lake. The Green /Red and NDCI imputation from linear interpo-lation for Lake Carramar exhibited a noticeable smoothing ef-fect in the masked regions (Figure 8d, l, g, o). This smoothing is consistent with patterns observed in the individual spectral bands (Figure S1), reflecting the limitations of linear interpo-lation in capturing spatial detail. In contrast, CNN imputation demonstrates strong spatial agreement with the observed data in the masked pixels for Green /Red. However, the CNN-imputed NDCI values tended to be lower than the observed NDCI val-ues in the masked areas, suggesting an underestimation. This discrepancy may arise from how NDCI was calculated - using a combination of selected spectral bands - where CNN achieved lower RMSE in the Green and Red bands, but higher RMSE in the Red Edge band, which contributes to NDCI. A similar pat-tern is observed in Lake Hume, linear interpolation results in low spatial agreement in both indices (Figure 9), while CNN-imputed Green /Red and NDCI values show high spatial consis-tency with the observed data. However, on both selected dates, CNN slightly overestimated the values of these indices, indicat-ing a minor bias in the imputation. We generated time series data of average NDCI values across lake pixels using the imputed PSB.SD imagery for Lake Carra-mar and Lake Hume (Figure 10). In Lake Carramar, the ob-served average NDCI consistently remained above zero, with noticeable fluctuations over time, indicating the presence of chlorophyll-a (Chla) and potential algal bloom events. Both the linear interpolation and CNN models closely matched the observed average NDCI values, achieving high R values above 0.995 (Figure 10a). In contrast, Lake Hume exhibited more dynamic temporal patterns. From August 2020 to Septem-ber 2021, the observed NDCI values were around or below 0, suggesting low Chla levels. From October 2021 to December 2023, NDCI values increased, indicating elevated Chla concen-trations, before declining again below zero through December 2024 (Figure 10b). The CNN model e ff ectively captured these temporal trends, achieving an R of 0.94 and an RMSE of 0.001, outperforming linear interpolation (R =0.71, RMSE =0.008), which showing a tendency to overestimate NDCI values on multiple days. NDCI values serve as indicators of algal con-centration in lakes. Values below 0 indicate low algal levels, values between 0 and 0.1 indicate moderate to high algal levels, and values greater than 0.1 signal an algal bloom risk. Based on these thresholds, we classified each day into three categories: low algal levels, moderate to high algal levels, and algal bloom risk. For Lake Carramar, none of the days fell into the low algal level category. Approximately 43.5% of the days were classi-fied as moderate to high algal levels, while 56.5% were identi-fied as being at risk of algal blooms. These classifications, de-rived from both linear interpolation and CNN-imputed imagery, were consistent with the observations, confirming the reliabil-ity of the imputation methods for water quality assessment. For Lake Hume, 62% of the observed days were classified as low algal levels (NDCI¡0), 34.6% showed moderate to high algal 10 Figure 7: RGB image data for (a) observed, (b) additional cloud masked (in white), (c) linear interpolation (as baseline model) imputed and the top two best models, (d) CNN and (e) Autoencoder-LSTM imputed imagery for Lake Grahamstown (11th October 2020). We provide a comparison of the observed and imputed values of 8 bands in the masked pixels for (f) linear interpolation, (g) CNN and (h) Autoencoder-LSTM, with R and RMSE shown in each plot. (i-p) and (q-x) is the same as (a-e), but for Lake Burragorang (29th July 2022) and Lake Hume (28th December 2021). Inception ResNet and Inception-ResNet–LSTM are the top two best models for Lake Burragorang, while CNN and Autoencoder–LSTM make the top two best models for Lake Hume. Note that the location, size and shape of the generated artificial clouds varied for individual days. 

11 Figure 8: We present Lake Carramar in 5th September 2020 as an example using linear interpolation and CNN imputation derived NDCI with Panel (a) RGB, Panel (b) additional cloud mask (in grey), Panel (c) observed, Panel (d) linear interpolation imputed, Panel (e) CNN imputed derived Green /Red, and Panel (f-h) as the observed. Panel (i-p) presents the same region as Panel (a-h) but for date 6 October 2021. Note that the location, size and shape of the artificial clouds varied for individual days. 

Figure 9: We present Lake Hume in 5th April 2021 as an example using linear interpolation and CNN imputation derived NDCI with Panel (a) RGB, Panel (b) additional cloud mask (in grey), Panel (c) observed, Panel (d) linear interpolation imputed, Panel (e) CNN imputed derived Green /Red, and Panel (f-h) as the observed. Panel (i-p) presents the same region as Panel (a-h), but for the date 26 September 2021. Note that the location, size and shape of the artificial clouds varied for individual days. 

12 levels (0¡NDCI¡0.1), and 33.8% were identified as being al-gal bloom risk (NDCI¿0.1). When using linear interpolation, 44.0% of days were estimated as low algal levels (NDCI¡0), whereas CNN imputation classified 70.1% of days in this cat-egory, closer to the observed. For moderate to high algal lev-els (0¡NDCI¡0.1), linear interpolation estimated 52.6% of days, while CNN imputation identified 25.9%. For algal bloom risk, both models showed good agreement with observations. Over-all, CNN imputation demonstrated higher classification accu-racy for Lake Hume compared to linear interpolation. 

4. Discussion 

Cloud cover and satellite technical limitations are common challenges in the application of optical satellites for water qual-ity monitoring. In this study, we used imagery from the Plan-etScope SuperDove satellite as a case study to evaluate the ef-fectiveness of data imputation across all spectral bands within artificial masked lake regions. These artificial masks were de-signed to simulate realistic cloud cover, which frequently ob-scures satellite observations. We evaluated the imputation per-formance of six deep learning models against a baseline linear interpolation method. All deep learning models achieved rel-atively low RMSE values across eight spectral bands for four lakes, with slightly higher RMSE values in the NIR band. For instance, in Lake Carramar, the CNN model achieved R rang-ing from 0.83 to 0.97, and RMSE values between 0.011 and 0.021, respectively. CNN consistently delivered the best per-formance (i.e., lowest RMSE) for Lake Carramar, Lake Gra-hamstown, and Lake Hume, while the Inception Resnet model performed best for Lake Burragorang. This discrepancy may be attributed to the di ff erences in the proportion of water pixels in each image, influenced by the shape and irregularity of the lakes’ boundaries. Across all eight spectral bands and masked regions, deep learning models consistently outperformed the baseline model. The top-performing deep learning models improved R by 0.13 – 0.17, and reduced RMSE by 0.006 – 0.019 compared to the baseline. Overall, CNN-based models outperformed the CNN-LSTM-based model, showing higher R and lower RMSE. De-spite the nominal sub-daily to daily revisit frequency provided by the Planetscope SuperDove, the actual temporal resolution in the study lakes was often beyond 2-3 days, particularly dur-ing the first two years of the study period. Extended periods of cloud cover further contributed to consecutive days of missing imagery, resulting in irregular time series rather than consistent daily observations. Since the LSTM models were trained using sequences of five timesteps, these gaps likely disrupted tempo-ral continuity and contributed to the reduced performance of the CNN-LSTM models compared to purely spatial CNN architec-tures. The imputed values across eight spectral bands enable the derivation of various indices for aquatic applications. In this study, we focused on algal bloom indices as a case example, given that all four lakes investigated have historical records of bloom events. However, during the study period (August 2020 – December 2024), not all lakes experienced active algal blooms. We derived two commonly used algal bloom indices (i.e., Green /Red and NDCI) from both the imputed and origi-nal imagery to assess temporal changes. Beyond algal bloom monitoring, other empirical water quality algorithms, such as those for turbidity [69, 72, 73], color dissolved organic matter [69, 74] can also be applied to the imputed data. In addition to water quality indices, other indices, such as NDVI, NDWI [75, 76] can also be derived from the imputed data. If the pri-mary focus is on a specific index, several approaches can be applied. One approach involves extracting the target index as one channel and applying deep learning models directly to im-pute the missing values for that index. Alternatively, principal component analysis can be used to identify key spectral com-ponents, which can then be processed using CNN or other deep learning techniques to enhance imputation accuracy. Moreover, the methodology presented in this study can be generalised to other satellites, including hyperspectral sensors. This flexibil-ity allows for broader applications in environmental monitor-ing, where high-resolution and multi-band data are essential for accurate analysis and prediction. Additionally, the imputed imagery can support more ad-vanced analytical and machine learning approaches [77, 78] for robust monitoring and prediction of algal blooms. As expected, the algal bloom indices derived from deep learning-imputed im-agery generally outperformed those from the baseline model. For instance, NDCI derived from CNN-imputed imagery for Lake Hume showed closer alignment with the observed data, with an average R increasing by 0.23 and RMSE decreasing by 0.007 compared to the baseline. Algal blooms are highly vari-able in space and time [8], and often comprise di ff erent domi-nant species such as phytoplankton, diatoms or cyanobacteria. These blooms can move horizontally and vertically within the water column [49], and their duration can vary from a few days to weeks. However, this study focused on imagery with scat-tered cloud cover, excluding full cloud-covered scenes. There-fore, the training dataset may lack su ffi cient representation of peak algal bloom conditions, potentially limiting the model’s predictive performance for high algal concentrations. To ad-dress this limitation, data augmentation techniques, such as up-sampling, could be useful to simulate high algal concentration scenarios. This would help ensure the training dataset better re-flects peak bloom conditions and improve model robustness in imputing intense bloom events. Moreover, the NDCI threshold used to classify algal blooms can vary between lakes due to di ff erences in their ecological and optical characteristics. In this study, we applied a common threshold range - NDCI ¡0, 0-0.1, and ¿0.1 - to classify water conditions into low, moderate and algal bloom levels. Clas-sification performance using CNN-imputed imagery showed improvements over linear interpolation. However, given the unique characteristics of each lake, the optimal NDCI thresh-old may di ff er across lakes. For instance, [79] showed a NDCI threshold of 0.2 for algal bloom identification for Lake Laguna, while [80] and [81] adopted a NDCI threshold of 0.06 for the Three Gorges Reservoir and Palmar reservoir. To accurately identify regions a ff ected by algal blooms, validation using in-situ data or outputs from a water quality model is required. 13 Figure 10: Timeseries of average NDCI extracted by the observed (in blue), linear interpolation imputed (in orange) and CNN model imputed (in green) for (a) Lake Carramar and (b) Lake Hume from August 2020 to December 2024. Pearson correlation R and RMSE of the observed and the imputed average NDCI are shown in (a) and (b). The black dashed line indicates the threshold of low algal biomass (NDCI¡0), and the red dashed line indicates the threshold of algal bloom risk (NDCI¿0.1). 

On the other hand, satellite imagery, including imputed data, could complement field observations, especially in areas with limited monitoring, by enhancing both calibration and valida-tion e ff orts. The use of imputed imagery to fill gaps caused by cloud cover strengthens the continuity of water quality moni-toring and prediction models, with caution directed toward the associated uncertainties. This enhancement supports improved identification of algal blooms and other water quality issues, contributing to enhanced water quality monitoring and catch-ment management. Cloud contamination and low pixel quality remain challenges for optical satellite applications, particularly for water quality monitoring. In data-driven approaches, the quality of the train-ing dataset is crucial. As such, the UDM masks — which iden-tify the pixel conditions (e.g., clear or cloud-a ff ected) play an important role in data preprocessing. However, in our study, inaccuracies in UDM mask classifications were observed for PlanetScope SuperDove imagery. Specifically, some pixels aff ected by clouds, haze or cloud shadows were incorrectly labelled as clear, allowing contaminated data into the train-ing dataset. This misclassification potentially degraded model performance and reduced the accuracy of the imputed values. Therefore, enhancing the reliability of cloud and cloud-shadow detection during preprocessing is essential for robust optical satellite analysis. While many studies have investigated cloud detection and gap-filling techniques for widely used satellites, such as MODIS, Landsat, Sentinel 2 – benefiting from their long-term archives – studies focused on high-resolution satel-lites such as PlanetScope SuperDove remain limited. Despite its advantages in spatial and temporal resolution and its spec-tral similarity to Sentinel 2, Planetscope SuperDove is still un-derexplored in this context. In this study, we assessed multiple deep learning models to impute missing data across eight spec-tral bands of various lake types and conditions. The imputed imagery was then used to derive water quality indices. Impor-tantly, since our primary objective was to compare model per-formance, the presence of cloud contamination is unlikely to bias the relative evaluation across models. Nevertheless, to im-prove the overall accuracy and reliability of imputed data, fur-ther advancements in cloud cover identification for Planetscope SuperDove and similar optical satellites are necessary. Enhanc-ing these preprocessing steps will support more e ff ective wa-ter quality monitoring and prediction, ultimately benefiting lake and catchment management. In this study, we artificially applied cloud masks to 10% of image pixels to simulate partially obscured satellite data. In real-world scenarios, however, cloud cover in satellite imagery can vary considerably. Previous studies have shown that as the percentage of cloud cover increases, the accuracy of imputed satellite data tends to decrease [82, 12, 36]. While it is possible to assess the impact of di ff erent cloud cover percentages, our findings suggest that these variations have minimal influence on the relative performance comparison between deep learning models. A key limitation of our study is that the models were 14 only tested on imagery with partial cloud cover. Their ability to reconstruct scenes that are fully obscured by clouds was not evaluated. Assessing this limitation would require further re-search into model performance under more extreme cloud con-ditions, which is critical for advancing robustness of satellite-based monitoring in highly cloud-prone regions. Future study is recommended to focus on the following re-search gaps: a) Enhancing cloud and cloud-shadow detection: Enhancing the accuracy and reliability of cloud and shadow classification is essential for ensuring high-quality training data in optical satellite applications. b) Evaluating model perfor-mance under high cloud coverage: For Planetscope SuperDove imagery, further investigation is needed to assess the e ff ec-tiveness of imputation models under conditions of high cloud cover, to improve dataset completeness in challenging scenar-ios. c) Establishing lake-specific thresholds for water quality in-dices: Developing tailored thresholds for indices such as NDCI through validation with in-situ measurements or outputs for a water quality model with imputed imagery; d) Incorporating data resampling and augmentation techniques: Applying meth-ods such as upsampling or synthetic data augmentation can im-prove the representation of rare or extreme events (e.g., algal blooms), thereby improving the predictive accuracy of water quality indicators. 

5. Conclusion 

Data imputation in optical remote sensing is essential for en-hancing the robustness of water quality monitoring, such as al-gal bloom detection. While previous research has largely fo-cused on widely used satellites such as MODIS, Landsat, Sen-tinel 2, this study extends data imputation techniques to the Planetscope SuperDove - a high-resolution optical satellite in-creasingly used in monitoring due to its superior spatial and temporal coverage. We evaluated the performance of a base-line model (i.e., linear interpolation) and deep learning mod-els for imputing missing spectral band values across four lakes. The top-performing deep learning model for each lake consis-tently showed superior performance in reconstructing spectral band values in the artificial masked regions, compared to the baseline model. To assess the practical utility of the imputed imagery, we applied it to algal bloom detection using empirical algorithms such as Green /Red and NDCI. These indices derived from deep learning-imputed data closely matched those from observed imagery. Our findings demonstrated that the deep learning-based imputation substantially improves the accuracy of blooming classification compared to the baseline method, underscoring its potential to enhance satellite-based environ-mental monitoring. This study evaluated the e ff ectiveness of deep learning tech-niques for imputing missing values of all spectral bands in op-tical satellite imagery and demonstrated the practical utility of the resulting imputed images. By filling data gaps, the high-resolution Planetscope SuperDove imagery can provide addi-tional insights for comprehensive spatiotemporal analysis of water quality. This enhancement could further enhance accu-rate prediction and early warning of water quality events (e.g., harmful algal blooms), while also improving risk assessment and identifying vulnerable regions. The methodology presented in this study can be generalised to other optical satellites and can be extended to a wide range of aquatic and terrestrial moni-toring applications, o ff ering valuable support for catchment and water resource management. 

6. Data and Code availability 

Data and Python code for the models are given via GitHub repo: . 

References                   

> [1] M. W. Matthews, Bio-optical modeling of phytoplankton chlorophyll-a, in: Bio-optical modeling and remote sensing of inland waters, Elsevier, 2017, pp. 157–188. [2] R. Houborg, M. F. McCabe, A cubesat enabled spatio-temporal enhance-ment method (cestem) utilizing planet, landsat and modis data, Remote Sensing of Environment 209 (2018) 211–226. [3] C. Verpoorter, T. Kutser, D. A. Seekell, L. J. Tranvik, A global inventory of lakes based on high-resolution satellite imagery, Geophysical Research Letters 41 (18) (2014) 6396–6402. [4] I. Chawla, L. Karthikeyan, A. K. Mishra, A review of remote sensing applications for water security: Quantity, quality, and extremes, Journal of Hydrology 585 (2020) 124826. [5] C. Le, C. Hu, J. Cannizzaro, D. English, F. Muller-Karger, Z. Lee, Evalu-ation of chlorophyll-a remote sensing algorithms for an optically complex estuary, Remote Sensing of Environment 129 (2013) 75–89. [6] J. C. Ho, A. M. Michalak, N. Pahlevan, Widespread global increase in intense lake phytoplankton blooms since the 1980s, Nature 574 (7780) (2019) 667–670. [7] M. H. Gholizadeh, A. M. Melesse, L. Reddi, A comprehensive review on water quality parameters estimation using remote sensing techniques, Sensors 16 (8) (2016) 1298. [8] S. Liu, W. Glamore, B. Tamburic, A. Morrow, F. Johnson, Remote sensing to detect harmful algal blooms in inland waterbodies, Science of the Total Environment 851 (2022) 158096. [9] S. Marta, Planet imagery product specifications, Planet Labs: San Fran-cisco, CA, USA 91 (2018) 170. [10] M. Bareuther, M. Klinge, A. Buerkert, Spatio-temporal dynamics of algae and macrophyte cover in urban lakes: a remote sensing analysis of bel-landur and varthur wetlands in bengaluru, india, Remote Sensing 12 (22) (2020) 3843. [11] R. Beck, M. Xu, S. Zhan, H. Liu, R. A. Johansen, S. Tong, B. Yang, S. Shu, Q. Wu, S. Wang, et al., Comparison of satellite reflectance algo-rithms for estimating phycocyanin values and cyanobacterial total biovol-ume in a temperate reservoir using coincident hyperspectral aircraft im-agery and dense coincident surface observations, Remote Sensing 9 (6) (2017) 538. [12] J. Daniels, C. P. Bailey, L. Liang, Filling cloud gaps in satellite aod re-trievals using an lstm cnn-autoencoder model, in: IGARSS 2022-2022 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, IEEE, 2022, pp. 2758–2761. [13] P. Scaramuzza, J. Barsi, Landsat 7 scan line corrector-o ff gap-filled prod-uct development, in: Proceeding of Pecora, Vol. 16, 2005, pp. 23–27. [14] S. Yi, N. Sneeuw, Filling the data gaps within grace missions using sin-gular spectrum analysis, Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth 126 (5) (2021) e2020JB021227. [15] A. E. Frazier, B. L. Hemingway, A technical review of planet smallsat data: Practical considerations for processing and using planetscope im-agery, Remote Sensing 13 (19) (2021) 3930. [16] M. Vizzari, Planetscope, sentinel-2, and sentinel-1 data integration for object-based land cover classification in google earth engine, Remote Sensing 14 (11) (2022) 2628. [17] V. Sagan, M. Maimaitijiang, S. Bhadra, M. Maimaitiyiming, D. R. Brown, P. Sidike, F. B. Fritschi, Field-scale crop yield prediction using multi-temporal worldview-3 and planetscope satellite data and deep learning,

15 ISPRS journal of photogrammetry and remote sensing 174 (2021) 265– 281. [18] T. Ehret, S. Lajouanie, V. Lefranc ¸ois, C. De Franchis, Automatic moni-toring of water level in small lakes using planetscope, in: 2021 IEEE In-ternational Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium IGARSS, IEEE, 2021, pp. 3356–3359. [19] A. S. Mansaray, A. R. Dzialowski, M. E. Martin, K. L. Wagner, H. Gholizadeh, S. H. Stoodley, Comparing planetscope to landsat-8 and sentinel-2 for sensing water quality in reservoirs in agricultural water-sheds, Remote Sensing 13 (9) (2021) 1847. [20] P. Team, Planetscope product specifications, Tech. rep. (2023). URL https://assets.planet.com/docs/Planet_PSScene_ Imagery_Product_Spec_letter_screen.pdf 

[21] Y.-H. Tu, K. Johansen, B. Aragon, M. M. El Hajj, M. F. McCabe, The radiometric accuracy of the 8-band multi-spectral surface reflectance from the planet superdove constellation, International Journal of Applied Earth Observation and Geoinformation 114 (2022) 103035. [22] H. Shen, X. Li, Q. Cheng, C. Zeng, G. Yang, H. Li, L. Zhang, Missing information reconstruction of remote sensing data: A technical review, IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Magazine 3 (3) (2015) 61–85. [23] G. Wang, D. Garcia, Y. Liu, R. De Jeu, A. J. Dolman, A three-dimensional gap filling method for large geophysical datasets: Application to global satellite soil moisture observations, Environmental Modelling & Software 30 (2012) 139–142. [24] M. Appel, E. Pebesma, Spatiotemporal multi-resolution approximations for analyzing global environmental data, Spatial Statistics 38 (2020) 100465. [25] F. Gerber, R. de Jong, M. E. Schaepman, G. Schaepman-Strub, R. Furrer, Predicting missing values in spatio-temporal remote sensing data, IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 56 (5) (2018) 2841– 2853. [26] S. Paheding, A. Saleem, M. F. H. Siddiqui, N. Rawashdeh, A. Essa, A. A. Reyes, Advancing horizons in remote sensing: a comprehensive survey of deep learning models and applications in image classification and beyond, Neural Computing and Applications 36 (27) (2024) 16727–16767. [27] M. Pritt, G. Chern, Satellite image classification with deep learning, in: 2017 IEEE applied imagery pattern recognition workshop (AIPR), IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–7. [28] F. Waldner, F. I. Diakogiannis, Deep learning on edge: Extracting field boundaries from satellite images with a convolutional neural network, Re-mote sensing of environment 245 (2020) 111741. [29] M. Segal-Rozenhaimer, A. Li, K. Das, V. Chirayath, Cloud detection algorithm for multi-modal satellite imagery using convolutional neural-networks (cnn), Remote Sensing of Environment 237 (2020) 111446. [30] Z. Zhang, M. Lu, S. Ji, H. Yu, C. Nie, Rich cnn features for water-body segmentation from very high resolution aerial and satellite imagery, Re-mote Sensing 13 (10) (2021) 1912. [31] R. Barzegar, M. T. Aalami, J. Adamowski, Short-term water quality vari-able prediction using a hybrid cnn–lstm deep learning model, Stochastic Environmental Research and Risk Assessment 34 (2) (2020) 415–433. [32] H. Chen, A. Chen, L. Xu, H. Xie, H. Qiao, Q. Lin, K. Cai, A deep learning cnn architecture applied in smart near-infrared analysis of water pollution for agricultural irrigation resources, Agricultural Water Management 240 (2020) 106303. [33] S. Mo, Y. Zhong, E. Forootan, N. Mehrnegar, X. Yin, J. Wu, W. Feng, X. Shi, Bayesian convolutional neural networks for predicting the terres-trial water storage anomalies during grace and grace-fo gap, Journal of Hydrology 604 (2022) 127244. [34] R. Archana, P. E. Jeevaraj, Deep learning models for digital image pro-cessing: a review, Artificial Intelligence Review 57 (1) (2024) 11. [35] R. Cresson, D. Ienco, R. Gaetano, K. Ose, D. H. T. Minh, Optical image gap filling using deep convolutional autoencoder from optical and radar images, in: IGARSS 2019-2019 IEEE International Geoscience and Re-mote Sensing Symposium, IEEE, 2019, pp. 218–221. [36] L. Liang, J. Daniels, M. Biancardi, Y. Zhou, Reconstructing aerosol op-tical depth using spatiotemporal long short-term memory convolutional autoencoder, Scientific Data 10 (1) (2023) 842. [37] G. Liu, F. A. Reda, K. J. Shih, T.-C. Wang, A. Tao, B. Catanzaro, Image inpainting for irregular holes using partial convolutions, in: Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV), 2018, pp. 85– 100. [38] M. Appel, E ffi cient data-driven gap filling of satellite image time series using deep neural networks with partial convolutions, Artificial Intelli-gence for the Earth Systems 3 (2) (2024) 220055. [39] Y. Lops, A. Pouyaei, Y. Choi, J. Jung, A. K. Salman, A. Sayeed, Applica-tion of a partial convolutional neural network for estimating geostationary aerosol optical depth data, Geophysical Research Letters 48 (15) (2021) e2021GL093096. [40] D. Xing, J. Hou, C. Huang, W. Zhang, Spatiotemporal reconstruction of modis normalized di ff erence snow index products using u-net with partial convolutions, Remote Sensing 14 (8) (2022) 1795. [41] C. Szegedy, S. Io ff e, V. Vanhoucke, A. Alemi, Inception-v4, inception-resnet and the impact of residual connections on learning, in: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, Vol. 31, 2017. [42] L. Qian, L. Wu, Z. Zhang, J. Fan, X. Yu, X. Liu, Q. Yang, Y. Cui, A gap filling method for daily evapotranspiration of global flux data sets based on deep learning, Journal of Hydrology 641 (2024) 131787. [43] ´A. Moreno-Mart´ ınez, E. Izquierdo-Verdiguier, M. P. Maneta, G. Camps-Valls, N. Robinson, J. Mu˜ noz-Mar´ ı, F. Sedano, N. Clinton, S. W. Running, Multispectral high resolution sensor fusion for smoothing and gap-filling in the cloud, Remote Sensing of Environment 247 (2020) 111901. [44] D. P. Roy, J. Ju, P. Lewis, C. Schaaf, F. Gao, M. Hansen, E. Lindquist, Multi-temporal modis–landsat data fusion for relative radiometric nor-malization, gap filling, and prediction of landsat data, Remote Sensing of Environment 112 (6) (2008) 3112–3130. [45] J. Wang, C. K. Lee, X. Zhu, R. Cao, Y. Gu, S. Wu, J. Wu, A new object-class based gap-filling method for planetscope satellite image time series, Remote Sensing of Environment 280 (2022) 113136. [46] J. Chen, X. Zhu, J. E. Vogelmann, F. Gao, S. Jin, A simple and e ff ective method for filling gaps in landsat etm + slc-o ff images, Remote sensing of environment 115 (4) (2011) 1053–1064. [47] G. Yin, G. Mariethoz, M. F. McCabe, Gap-filling of landsat 7 imagery using the direct sampling method, Remote Sensing 9 (1) (2016) 12. [48] A. J. King, J. H. Mynott, N. Bond, R. Grieger, D. Hamilton, T. Hawke, J. Johnston-Bates, M. Kennard, G. King, R. T. Kingsford, et al., Murray– darling basin 2023 outlook. environmental values: Technical literature review (2022). [49] S. Liu, F. Johnson, B. Tamburic, N. Crosbie, W. Glamore, The e ff ec-tiveness of global constructed shallow waterbody design guidelines to limit harmful algal blooms, Water Resources Research 57 (8) (2021) e2020WR028918. [50] L. C. Vilhena, I. Hillmer, J. r. Imberger, The role of climate change in the occurrence of algal blooms: Lake burragorang, australia, Limnology and Oceanography 55 (3) (2010) 1188–1200. [51] A. Golshan, C. Evans, P. Geary, A. Morrow, M. Maeder, R. Tauler, Pat-terns of cyanobacterial abundance in a major drinking water reservoir: what 3 years of comprehensive monitoring data reveals?, Environmental monitoring and assessment 192 (2020) 1–11. [52] S. Mueller, The role of nutrients in cyanobacterial blooms in a shallow reservoir, Ph.D. thesis (2014). [53] H. Water, Catchment management plan: Hunter water’s eight element plan for our catchments (2011). [54] WaterNSW, Fact sheet: Warragamba dam, Tech. rep. (2015). URL https://www.waternsw.com.au/ __data/assets/pdf_file/0011/114869/ Fact-sheet-Warragamba-Dam-fact-sheet-Nov15-ScreenRes. pdf 

[55] L. Alzubaidi, J. Zhang, A. J. Humaidi, A. Al-Dujaili, Y. Duan, O. Al-Shamma, J. Santamar´ ıa, M. A. Fadhel, M. Al-Amidie, L. Farhan, Review of deep learning: concepts, cnn architectures, challenges, applications, future directions, Journal of big Data 8 (2021) 1–74. [56] W. Han, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, L. Wang, X. Huang, J. Li, S. Wang, W. Chen, X. Li, R. Feng, et al., A survey of machine learning and deep learning in remote sensing of geological environment: Challenges, advances, and opportunities, ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 202 (2023) 87–113. [57] H. Shirmard, E. Farahbakhsh, R. D. M¨ uller, R. Chandra, A review of ma-chine learning in processing remote sensing data for mineral exploration, Remote Sensing of Environment 268 (2022) 112750. [58] P. Li, Y. Pei, J. Li, A comprehensive survey on design and application of autoencoder in deep learning, Applied Soft Computing 138 (2023) 110176. 

16 [59] B. Alotaibi, M. Alotaibi, A hybrid deep resnet and inception model for hyperspectral image classification, PFG–Journal of Photogrammetry, Re-mote Sensing and Geoinformation Science 88 (6) (2020) 463–476. [60] P. Iyer, A. Sriram, S. Lal, Deep learning ensemble method for classifi-cation of satellite hyperspectral images, Remote Sensing Applications: Society and Environment 23 (2021) 100580. [61] J. Donahue, L. Anne Hendricks, S. Guadarrama, M. Rohrbach, S. Venu-gopalan, K. Saenko, T. Darrell, Long-term recurrent convolutional net-works for visual recognition and description, in: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2015, pp. 2625– 2634. [62] O. Vinyals, A. Toshev, S. Bengio, D. Erhan, Show and tell: A neural im-age caption generator, in: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on com-puter vision and pattern recognition, 2015, pp. 3156–3164. [63] W. Boulila, H. Ghandorh, M. A. Khan, F. Ahmed, J. Ahmad, A novel cnn-lstm-based approach to predict urban expansion, Ecological Informatics 64 (2021) 101325. [64] B. Pan, H. Yu, H. Cheng, S. Du, S. Cai, M. Zhao, J. Du, F. Xie, A cnn– lstm machine-learning method for estimating particulate organic carbon from remote sensing in lakes, Sustainability 15 (17) (2023) 13043. [65] N. Srivastava, E. Mansimov, R. Salakhudinov, Unsupervised learning of video representations using lstms, in: International conference on ma-chine learning, PMLR, 2015, pp. 843–852. [66] A. Shakeel, R. J. Walters, S. K. Ebmeier, N. Al Moubayed, Aladdin: Autoencoder-lstm-based anomaly detector of deformation in insar, IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 60 (2022) 1–12. [67] M. Abadi, P. Barham, J. Chen, Z. Chen, A. Davis, J. Dean, M. Devin, S. Ghemawat, G. Irving, M. Isard, et al., {TensorFlow }: a system for 

{Large-Scale } machine learning, in: 12th USENIX symposium on operat-ing systems design and implementation (OSDI 16), 2016, pp. 265–283. [68] D. P. Kingma, J. Ba, Adam: A method for stochastic optimization, arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 (2014). [69] P. Brezonik, K. D. Menken, M. Bauer, Landsat-based remote sensing of lake water quality characteristics, including chlorophyll and colored dis-solved organic matter (cdom), Lake and Reservoir Management 21 (4) (2005) 373–382. [70] S. Mishra, D. R. Mishra, Normalized di ff erence chlorophyll index: A novel model for remote estimation of chlorophyll-a concentration in tur-bid productive waters, Remote Sensing of Environment 117 (2012) 394– 406. [71] J. C. Ho, R. P. Stumpf, T. B. Bridgeman, A. M. Michalak, Using landsat to extend the historical record of lacustrine phytoplankton blooms: a lake erie case study, Remote Sensing of Environment 191 (2017) 273–285. [72] A. G. Dekker, R. Vos, S. Peters, Analytical algorithms for lake water tsm estimation for retrospective analyses of tm and spot sensor data, Interna-tional journal of remote sensing 23 (1) (2002) 15–35. [73] F. Wang, L. Han, H.-T. Kung, R. Van Arsdale, Applications of landsat-5 tm imagery in assessing and mapping water quality in reelfoot lake, tennessee, International Journal of Remote Sensing 27 (23) (2006) 5269– 5283. [74] T. Schroeder, V. Brando, N. Cherukuru, L. Clementson, D. Blondeau-Patissier, A. Dekker, M. Schaale, J. Fischer, Remote sensing of apparent and inherent optical properties of tasmanian coastal waters: application to modis data, in: Proceedings of the XIX Ocean Optics Conference, Barga, Italy, 2008, pp. 6–10. [75] B.-C. Gao, Ndwi—a normalized di ff erence water index for remote sens-ing of vegetation liquid water from space, Remote sensing of environment 58 (3) (1996) 257–266. [76] S. K. McFeeters, The use of the normalized di ff erence water index (ndwi) in the delineation of open water features, International journal of remote sensing 17 (7) (1996) 1425–1432. [77] J. Chen, S. Chen, R. Fu, D. Li, H. Jiang, C. Wang, Y. Peng, K. Jia, B. J. Hicks, Remote sensing big data for water environment monitoring: Cur-rent status, challenges, and future prospects, Earth’s Future 10 (2) (2022) e2021EF002289. [78] V. Sagan, K. T. Peterson, M. Maimaitijiang, P. Sidike, J. Sloan, B. A. Greeling, S. Maalouf, C. Adams, Monitoring inland water quality using remote sensing: Potential and limitations of spectral indices, bio-optical simulations, machine learning, and cloud computing, Earth-Science Re-views 205 (2020) 103187. [79] I. Caballero, G. Navarro, Monitoring cyanohabs and water quality in la-guna lake (philippines) with sentinel-2 satellites during the 2020 pacific typhoon season, Science of the Total Environment 788 (2021) 147700. [80] X. Zhi, L. Chen, S. Chen, J. Yu, J. Jiang, Y. Xu, L. Li, X. Meng, Z. Shen, Heterogeneity and influencing factors of algal blooms in the reservoir-impacted tributary: Evidence from remote sensing and physical-based model, Journal of Hydrology 634 (2024) 131058. [81] L. Aubriot, B. Zabaleta, F. Bordet, D. Sienra, J. Risso, M. Achkar, A. Somma, Assessing the origin of a massive cyanobacterial bloom in the r´ ıo de la plata (2019): Towards an early warning system, Water Research 181 (2020) 115944. [82] B. Chen, Y. Ye, C. Tong, J. Deng, K. Wang, Y. Hong, A novel big data mining framework for reconstructing large-scale daily maiac aod data across china from 2000 to 2020, GIScience & Remote Sensing 59 (1) (2022) 670–685. 

17